**7** 

**MACROS** 

Macros are, in essence, a tool for making the compiler write code for you. You give the compiler a formula for generating code 

given some input parameters, and the compiler 

replaces every invocation of the macro with the result 

of running through the formula. You can think of 

macros as automatic code substitution where you get 

to define the rules for the substitution. 

Rust’s macros come in many different shapes and sizes to make it easy to implement many different forms of code generation. The two primary types are *declarative* macros and *procedural* macros, and we will explore both of them in this chapter. We’ll also look at some of the ways macros can come in handy in your everyday coding and some of the pitfalls that arise with more advanced use. 

Programmers coming from C-based languages may be used to the unholy land of C and C++ where you can use #define to change each true to false, or to remove all occurrences of the else keyword. If that’s the case for 

you, you’ll need to disassociate macros from a feeling of doing something “bad.” Macros in Rust are far from the Wild West of C macros. They follow (mostly) well-defined rules and are fairly misuse-resistant. 

**Declarative Macros** 

**102** 

Chapter 7 

**N O T E** 

Declarative macros are those defined using the macro_rules! syntax, which
 lets you conveniently define function-like macros without having to resort to writing a dedicated crate for the purpose (as you do with procedural macros). Once you’ve defined a declarative macro, you can invoke it using the name
 of the macro followed by an exclamation mark. I like to think of this kind
 of macro as a sort of compiler-assisted search and replace: it does the job
 for many regular, well-structured transformation tasks, and for eliminating repetitive boilerplate. In your experience with Rust up until this point, most of the macros you have recognized as macros are likely to have been declara- tive macros. Note, however, that not all function-like macros are declarative macros; macro_rules! itself is one example of this, and format_args! is another. The ! suffix merely indicates to the compiler that the macro invocation will be replaced with different source code at compile time. 

*Since Rust’s parser specifically recognizes and parses macro invocations annotated with* *!**, you can use them only in places where the parser allows them. They work in most places you’d expect, like in expression position or in an* *impl* *block, but not every- where. For example, you cannot (at the time of writing) invoke a function-like macro where an identifier or match arm is expected.* 

It may not be immediately obvious why declarative macros are called declarative. After all, don’t you “declare” everything in your program? In this context, *declarative* refers to the fact that you don’t say *how* the macro’s inputs should be translated into the output, just that you want the output to look like A when the input is B. You declare that it shall be so, and the com- piler figures out all the parsing rewiring that has to happen to make your declaration reality. This makes declarative macros concise and expressive, though it also has a tendency to make them rather cryptic since you have a limited language with which to express your declarations. 

**When to Use Them** 

Declarative macros are primarily useful when you find yourself writing the same code over and over, and you’d like to, well, not do that. They’re best suited for fairly mechanical replacements—if you’re aiming to do fancy code transformations or lots of code generation, procedural macros are likely a better fit. 

I most frequently use declarative macros in cases where I find myself writing repetitive and structurally similar code, such as in tests and trait 

implementations. For tests, I often want to run the same test multiple times but with slightly different configurations. I might have something like what is shown in Listing 7-1. 

```
fn test_inner<T>(init: T, frobnify: bool) { ... }
#[test]
fn test_1u8_frobnified() {
  test_inner(1u8, true);
}
```

// ... 

```
#[test]
fn test_1i128_not_frobnified() {
  test_inner(1i128, false);
}
```

Listing 7-1: Repetitive testing code 

While this works, it’s too verbose, too repetitive, and too prone to man- ual error. With macros we can do much better, as shown in Listing 7-2. 

```
macro_rules! test_battery {
  ($($t:ty as $name:ident),*)) => {
```

$(
 mod $name { 

```
        #[test]
        fn frobnified() { test_inner::<$t>(1, true) }
        #[test]
        fn unfrobnified() { test_inner::<$t>(1, false) }
```

} )* 

} } 

```
test_battery! {
  u8 as u8_tests,
  // ...
  i128 as i128_tests
```

); 

Listing 7-2: Making a macro repeat for you 

This macro expands each comma-separated directive into its own mod- ule that then contains two tests, one that calls test_inner with true, and one with false. While the macro definition isn’t trivial, it makes adding more tests much easier. Each type is one line in the test_battery! invocation, and the macro will take care of generating tests for both true and false argu- ments. We could also have it generate tests for different values for init. We’ve now significantly reduced the likelihood that we’ll forget to test a particular configuration! 

The story for trait implementations is similar. If you define your own trait, you’ll often want to implement that trait for a number of types in the standard library, even if those implementations are trivial. Let’s imagine you invented the Clone trait and want to implement it for all the Copy types 

Macros **103** 

**104** Chapter 7 

**N O T E** 

in the standard library. Instead of manually writing an implementation for each one, you can use a macro like the one in Listing 7-3. 

```
macro_rules! clone_from_copy {
  ($($t:ty),*) => {
    $(impl Clone for $t {
      fn clone(&self) -> Self { *self }
```

})* } 

```
}
clone_from_copy![bool, f32, f64, u8, i8, /* ... */];
```

Listing 7-3: Using a macro to implement a trait for many similar types in one fell swoop 

Here, we generate an implementation of Clone for each provided type whose body just uses * to copy out of &self. You may wonder why we don’t add a blanket implementation of Clone for T where T: Copy. We could do that, but a big reason not to is that it would force types in other crates to also use that same implementation of Clone for their own types that happen to be Copy. An experimental compiler feature called *specialization* could offer a workaround, but at the time of writing the stabilization of that feature
 is still some way off. So, for the time being, we’re better off enumerating
 the types specifically. This pattern also extends beyond simple forwarding implementations: for example, you could easily alter the code in Listing 7-3 to implement an AddOne trait to all integer types! 

*If you ever find yourself wondering if you should use generics or a declarative macro, you should use generics. Generics are generally more ergonomic than macros and integrate much better with other constructs in the language. Consider this rule of thumb: if your code changes based on type, use generics; otherwise, use macros.* 

**How They Work** 

Every programming language has a *grammar* that dictates how the indi- vidual characters that make up the source code can be turned into *tokens*. Tokens are the lowest-level building blocks of a language, such as numbers, punctuation characters, string and character literals, and identifiers; at
 this level, there’s no distinction between language keywords and variable names. For example, the text (value + 4) would be represented by the five- token sequence (, value, +, 4, ) in Rust-like grammar. The process of turning text into tokens also provides a layer of abstraction between the rest of the compiler and the gnarly low-level details of parsing text. For example, in the token representation, there is no notion of whitespace, and /*"foo"*/ and "/*foo*/" have distinct representations (the former is no token, and the latter is a string literal token with the content /*foo*/). 

Once the source code has been turned into a sequence of tokens, the compiler walks that sequence and assigns syntactic meaning to the tokens. For example, ()-delimited tokens make up a group, ! tokens denote macro invo- cations, and so on. This is the process of *parsing*, which ultimately produces an abstract syntax tree (AST) that describes the structure represented by the 

source code. As an example, consider the expression let x = || 4, which con- sists of the sequence of tokens let (keyword), x (identifier), = (punctuation), two instances of | (punctuation), and 4 (literal). When the compiler turns that into a syntax tree, it represents it as a *statement* whose *pattern* is the *identifier* x and whose right-hand *expression* is a *closure* that has an empty *argument list* and a *literal expression* of the *integer literal* 4 as its body. Notice how the syntax tree rep- resentation is much richer than the token sequence, since it assigns syntactic meaning to the token combinations following the language’s grammar. 

Rust macros dictate the syntax tree that a given sequence of tokens gets turned into—when the compiler encounters a macro invocation during parsing, it has to evaluate the macro to determine the replacement tokens, which will ultimately become the syntax tree for the macro invocation. At this point, however, the compiler is still parsing the tokens and might not be in a position to evaluate a macro yet, since all it has done is parse the tokens of the macro definition. Instead, then, the compiler defers the parsing of anything contained within the delimiters of a macro invocation and remem- bers the input token sequence. When the compiler is ready to evaluate the indicated macro, it evaluates the macro over the token sequence, parses the tokens it yields, and substitutes the resulting syntax tree into the tree where the macro invocation was. 

Technically, the compiler does do a little bit of parsing for the input
 to a macro. Specifically, it parses out basic things like string literals and delimited groups and so produces a sequence of token *trees* rather than just tokens. For example, the code x - (a.b + 4) parses as a sequence of three token trees. The first token tree is a single token that is the identifier x, the second is a single token that is the punctuation character -, and the third is a group (using parentheses as the delimiter), which itself consists of a sequence of five token trees: a (an identifier), . (punctuation), b (another identifier), + (another punctuation token), and 4 (a literal). This means that the input to a macro does not necessarily have to be valid Rust, but it must consist of code that the Rust compiler can parse. For example, you couldn’t write for <- x in Rust outside of a macro invocation, but inside of a macro invocation you can, as long as the macro produces valid syntax. On the other hand, you cannot pass for { to a macro because it doesn’t have a closing brace. 

Declarative macros always generate valid Rust as output. You cannot have a macro generate, say, the first half of a function invocation or an if without the block that follows it. A declarative macro must generate an expression (basically anything that you can assign to a variable), a statement such as let x = 1;, an item like a trait definition or impl block, a type, or a match pattern. This makes Rust macros resistant to misuse: you simply can- not write a declarative macro that generates invalid Rust code, because the macro definition itself would not compile! 

That’s really all there is to declarative macros at a high level—when the compiler encounters a macro invocation, it passes the tokens contained within the invocation delimiters to the macro, parses the resulting token stream, and replaces the macro invocation with the resulting AST. 

Macros **105** 

**How to Write Declarative Macros** 

An exhaustive explanation of all the syntax that declarative macros support is outside the scope of this book. However, we’ll cover the basics as there are some oddities worth pointing out. 

Declarative macros consist of two main parts: *matchers* and *transcribers*. A given macro can have many matchers, and each matcher has an associ- ated transcriber. When the compiler finds a macro invocation, it walks
 the macro’s matchers from first to last, and when it finds a matcher that matches the tokens in the invocation, it substitutes the invocation by walk- ing the tokens of the corresponding transcriber. Listing 7-4 shows how the different parts of a declarative macro rule fit together. 

```
macro_rules! /* macro name */ {
  (/* 1st matcher */) => { /* 1st transcriber */ };
  (/* 2nd matcher */) => { /* 2nd transcriber */ };
```

} 

Listing 7-4: Declarative macro definition components 

**Matchers** 

You can think of a macro matcher as a token tree that the compiler tries to twist and bend in predefined ways to match the input token tree it was given at the invocation site. As an example, consider a macro with the matcher $a:ident + $b:expr. That matcher will match any identifier (:ident) followed by a plus sign followed by any Rust expression (:expr). If the macro is invoked with x + 3 * 5, the compiler notices that the matcher matches if it sets $a = x and $b = 3 * 5. Even though * never appears in the matcher, the compiler realizes that 3 * 5 is a valid expression and that it can therefore be matched with $b:expr, which accepts anything that is an expression (the :expr part). 

Matchers can get pretty hairy, but they have huge expressive power, much like regular expressions. For a not-too-hairy example, this matcher accepts a sequence ($()) of one or more (+) comma-separated (),) key/value pairs given in key => value format: 

```
$($key:expr => $value:expr),+
```

And, crucially, code that invokes a macro with this matcher can give an arbitrarily complex expression for the key or value—the magic of match- ers will make sure that the key and value expressions are partitioned appropriately. 

Macro rules support a wide variety of *fragment types*; you’ve already seen :ident for identifiers and :expr for expressions, but there is also :ty for types and even :tt for any single token tree! You can find a full list of the frag- ment types in Chapter 3 of the Rust language reference (*https://doc.rust-lang .org/reference/macros-by-example.html*). These, plus the mechanism for match- ing a pattern repeatedly ($()), enable you to match most straightforward code patterns. If, however, you find that it is difficult to express the pattern you want with a matcher, you may want to try a procedural macro instead, 

**106** Chapter 7 

**N O T E** 

where you don’t need to follow the strict syntax that macro_rules! requires. We’ll look at these in more detail later in the chapter. 

**Transcribers** 

Once the compiler has matched a declarative macro matcher, it generates code using the matcher’s associated transcriber. The variables defined by
 a macro matcher are called *metavariables*, and the compiler substitutes any occurrence of each metavariable in the transcriber (like $key in the example in the previous section) with the input that matches that part of the matcher. If you have repetition in the matcher (like $(),+ in that same example), you can use the same syntax in the transcriber and it will be repeated once for each match in the input, with each expansion holding the appropriate sub- stitution for each metavariable for that iteration. For example, for the $key and $value matcher, we could write the following transcriber to generate an insert call into some map for each $key/$value pair that was matched: 

```
$(map.insert($key, $value);)+
```

Notice that here we want a semicolon for each repetition, not just to delimit the repetition, so we place the semicolon inside the repetition parentheses. 

*You must use a metavariable in each repetition in the transcriber so that the compiler knows which repetition in the matcher to use (in case there is more than one).* 

**Hygiene** 

You may have heard that Rust macros are *hygienic*, and perhaps that being hygienic makes them safer or nicer to work with, without necessarily under- standing what that means. When we say Rust macros are hygienic, we mean that a declarative macro (generally) cannot affect variables that aren’t explic- itly passed to it. A trivial example is that if you declare a variable with the name foo, and then call a macro that also defines a variable named foo, 

the macro’s foo is by default not visible at the call site (the place where the macro is called from). Similarly, macros cannot access variables defined at the call site (even self) unless they are explicitly passed in. 

You can, most of the time, think of macro identifiers as existing in their own namespace that is separate from that of the code they expand into. For an example, take a look at the code in Listing 7-5, which has a macro that tries (and fails) to shadow a variable at the call site. 

```
macro_rules! let_foo {
  ($x:expr) => {
```

let foo = $x; } 

```
}
let foo = 1;
// expands to let foo = 2;
let_foo!(2);
assert_eq!(foo, 1);
```

Listing 7-5: Macros exist in their own little universes. Mostly. 

Macros **107** 

After the compiler expands let_foo!(2), the assert looks like it should fail. However, the foo from the original code and the one generated by the macro exist in different universes and have no relationship to one another beyond that they happen to share a human-readable name. In fact, the compiler will complain that the let foo in the macro is an unused vari- able. This hygiene is very helpful in making macros easier to debug—you don’t have to worry about accidentally shadowing or overwriting variables in the macro caller just because you happened to choose the same vari- able names! 

This hygienic separation does not apply beyond variable identifiers, however. Declarative macros do share a namespace for types, modules, and functions with the call site. This means your macro can define new func- tions that can be called in the invoking scope, add new implementations to a type defined elsewhere (and not passed in), introduce a new module that can then be accessed where the macro was invoked, and so on. This is by design—if macros could not affect the broader code like this, it would be much more cumbersome to use them to generate types, trait implementa- tions, and functions, which is where they come in most handy. 

The lack of hygiene for types in macros is particularly important when writing a macro you want to export from your crate. For the macro to truly be reusable, you cannot assume anything about what types will be in scope at the caller. Maybe the code that calls your macro has a mod std {} defined or has imported its own Result type. To be on the safe side, make sure you use fully specified types like ::core::option::Option or ::alloc::boxed::Box.
 If you specifically need to refer to something in the crate that defines the macro, use the special metavariable $crate. 

**NOTE** *Avoid using* *::std* *paths if you can so that the macro will continue to work in* *no_std* *crates.* 

You can choose to share identifiers between a macro and its caller if you want the macro to affect a specific variable in the caller’s scope. The key is to remember where the identifier originated, because that’s the namespace the identifier will be tied to. If you put let foo = 1; in a macro, the identi- fier foo originates in the macro and will never be available to the identifier namespace at the caller. If, on the other hand, the macro takes $foo:ident
 as an argument and then writes let $foo = 1;, when the caller invokes the macro with !(foo), the identifier will have originated in the caller and will therefore refer to foo in the caller’s scope. 

The identifier does not have to be quite so explicitly passed, either; any identifier that appears in code that originates outside the macro will refer to the identifier in the caller’s scope. In the example in Listing 7-6, the vari- able identifier appears in an :expr but nonetheless has access to the variable in the caller’s scope. 

```
          macro_rules! please_set {
            ($i:ident, $x:expr) => {
```

$i = $x; } 

**108** Chapter 7 

```
             }
             let mut x = 1;
             please_set!(x, x + 1);
             assert_eq!(x, 2);
```

Listing 7-6: Giving macros access to identifiers at the call site 

We could have used = $i + 1 in the macro instead, but we could not have used = x + 1 as the name x is not available in the macro’s definition scope. 

One last note on declarative macros and scoping: unlike pretty much everything else in Rust, declarative macros exist in the source code only after they are declared. If you try to use a macro that you define further down in the file, this will not work! This applies globally to your project; if you declare a macro in one module and want to use it in another, the module you declare the macro in must appear earlier in the crate, not later. If foo and bar are mod- ules at the root of a crate, and foo declares a macro that bar wants to use, then mod foo must appear before mod bar in *lib.rs*! 

**NOTE** *There is one exception to this odd scoping of macros (formally called* textual scop- ing*), and that is if you mark the macro with* *#[macro_export]**. That annotation effec- tively hoists the macro to the root of the crate and marks it as* *pub* *so that it can then be used anywhere in your crate or by your crate’s dependents.* 

**Procedural Macros** 

You can think of a procedural macro as a combination of a parser and code generation, where you write the glue code in between. At a high level, with procedural macros, the compiler gathers the sequence of input tokens to the macro and runs your program to figure out what tokens to replace them with. 

Procedural macros are so called because you define *how* to generate code given some input tokens rather than just writing what code gets gener- ated. There are very few smarts involved on the compiler’s side—as far as it is aware, the procedural macro is more or less a source code preprocessor that may replace code arbitrarily. The requirement that your input can be parsed as a stream of Rust tokens still holds, but that’s about it! 

**Types of Procedural Macros** 

Procedural macros come in three different flavors, each specialized to a particular common use case: 

- Function-like macros, like the ones that macro_rules! generates 

- Attribute macros, like #[test] 

- Derive macros, like #[derive(Serialize)] 

  All three types use the same underlying mechanism: the compiler pro- vides your macro with a sequence of tokens, and it expects you to produce 

Macros **109** 

**110** Chapter 7 

a sequence of tokens in return that are (probably) related to the input tree. However, they differ in how the macro is invoked and how its output is han- dled. We’ll cover each one briefly. 

**Function-Like Macros** 

The function-like macro is the simplest form of procedural macro. Like a declarative macro, it simply replaces the macro code at the call site with the code that the procedural macro returns. However, unlike with declarative macros, all the guard rails are off: these macros (like all procedural mac- ros) are not required to be hygienic and will not protect you from interact- ing with identifiers in the surrounding code at the call site. Instead, your macros are expected to explicitly call out which identifiers should overlap with the surrounding code (using Span::call_site) and which should be treated as private to the macro (using Span::mixed_site, which we’ll discuss later). 

**Attribute Macros** 

The attribute macro also replaces the item that the attribute is assigned to wholesale, but this one takes two inputs: the token tree that appears in the attribute (minus the attribute’s name) and the token tree of the entire item it is attached to, including any other attributes that item may have. Attribute macros allow you to easily write a procedural macro that transforms an item, such as by adding a prelude or epilogue to a function definition (like #[test] does) or by modifying the fields of a struct. 

**Derive Macros** 

The derive macro is slightly different from the other two in that it adds to, rather than replaces, the target of the macro. Even though this limita- tion may seem severe, derive macros were one of the original motivating factors behind the creation of procedural macros. Specifically, the serde crate needed derive macros to be able to implement its now-well-known #[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)] magic. 

Derive macros are arguably the simplest of the procedural macros, since they have such a rigid form: you can append items only after the annotated item; you can’t replace the annotated item, and you cannot have the derivation take arguments. Derive macros do allow you to define *helper attributes*—attributes that can be placed inside the annotated type to give clues to the derive macro (like #[serde(skip)])—but these function mostly like markers and are not independent macros. 

**The Cost of Procedural Macros** 

Before we talk about when each of the different procedural macro types is appropriate, it’s worth discussing why you may want to think twice before you reach for a procedural macro—namely, increased compile time. 

Procedural macros can significantly increase compile times for two main reasons. The first is that they tend to bring with them some pretty 

heavy dependencies. For example, the syn crate, which provides a parser for Rust token streams that makes the experience of writing procedural macros much easier, can take tens of seconds to compile with all features enabled. You can (and should) mitigate this by disabling features you do not need and compiling your procedural macros in debug mode rather than release mode. Code often compiles several times faster in debug mode, and for most procedural macros, you won’t even notice the differ- ence in execution time. 

The second reason why procedural macros increase compile time is that they make it easy for you to generate a lot of code without realizing it. While the macro saves you from having to actually type the generated code, it does not save the compiler from having to parse, compile, and optimize it. As you use more procedural macros, that generated boilerplate adds up, and it can bloat your compile times. 

That said, the actual execution time of procedural macros is rarely a factor in overall compile time. While the compiler has to wait for the proce- dural macro to do its thing before it can continue, in practice, most proce- dural macros don’t do any heavy computation. That said, if your procedural macro is particularly involved, you may end up with your compiles spend- ing a significant chunk of execution time on your procedural macro code, which is worth keeping an eye out for! 

**So You Think You Want a Macro** 

Let’s now look at some good uses for each type of procedural macro. We’ll start with the easy one: derive macros. 

**When to Use Derive Macros** 

Derive macros are used for one thing, and one thing only: to automate the implementation of a trait where automation is possible. Not all traits have obvious automated implementations, but many do. In practice, you should consider adding a derive macro for a trait only if the trait is implemented often and if its implementation for any given type is fairly obvious. The first of these conditions may seem like common sense; if your trait is going to be implemented only once or twice, it’s probably not worth writing and main- taining a convoluted derive macro for it. 

The second condition may seem stranger, however: what does it mean for the implementation to be “obvious”? Consider a trait like Debug. If you were told what Debug does and were shown a type, you would probably expect an implementation of Debug to output the name of each field along- side the debug representation of its value. And that’s what derive(Debug) does. What about Clone? You’d probably expect it to just clone every field— and again, that’s what derive(Clone) does. With derive(serde::Serialize), we expect it to serialize every field and its value, and it does just that. In gen- eral, you want the derivation of a trait to match the developer’s intuition for what it probably does. If there is no obvious derivation for a trait, or worse yet, if your derivation does not match the obvious implementation, then you’re probably better off not giving it a derive macro. 

Macros **111** 

**112** Chapter 7 

**When to Use Function-Like Macros** 

Function-like macros are harder to give a general rule of thumb for. You might say you should use function-like macros when you want a function- like macro but can’t express it with macro_rules!, but that’s a fairly subjective guideline. You can do a lot with declarative macros if you really put your mind to it, after all! 

There are two particularly good reasons to reach for a function-like macro: 

- If you already have a declarative macro, and its definition is becoming so hairy that the macro is hard to maintain. 

- If you have a pure function that you need to be able to execute at com- pile time but cannot express it with const fn. An example of this is the phf crate, which generates a hash map or set using a perfect hash function when given a set of keys provided at compile time. Another is hex-literal, which takes a string of hexadecimal characters and replaces it with the corresponding bytes. In general, anything that does not merely trans- form the input at compile time but actually computes over it is likely to be a good candidate. 

  I do not recommend reaching for a function-like macro just so that you can break hygiene within your macro. Hygiene for function-like macros is a feature that avoids many debugging headaches, and you should think very carefully before you intentionally break it. 

  **When to Use Attribute Macros** 

  That leaves us with attribute macros. Though these are arguably the most general of procedural macros, they are also the hardest to know when to use. Over the years and time and time again, I have seen four ways in which attribute macros add tremendous value. 

  **Test generation** 

  It is very common to want to run the same test under multiple different configurations, or many similar tests with the same bootstrapping code. While a declarative macro may let you express this, your code is often easier to read and maintain if you have an attribute like #[foo_test] that introduces a setup prelude and postscript in each annotated test, or a repeatable attribute like #[test_case(1)] #[test_case(2)] to mark that a given test should be repeated multiple times, once with each input. 

  **Framework annotations** 

  Libraries like rocket use attribute macros to augment functions and types with additional information that the framework then uses without the user having to do a lot of manual configuration. It’s so much more convenient to be able to write #[get("/<name>")] fn hello(name: String) than to have to set up a configuration struct with function pointers and 

the like. Essentially, the attributes make up a miniature domain-specific language (DSL) that hides a lot of boilerplate that’d otherwise be nec- essary. Similarly, the asynchronous I/O framework tokio lets you use #[tokio::main] async fn main() to automatically set up a runtime and run your asynchronous code, thereby saving you from writing the same run- time setup in every asynchronous application’s main function. 

**Transparent middleware** 

Some libraries want to inject themselves into your application in unobtru- sive ways to provide added value that does not change the application’s functionality. For example, tracing and logging libraries like tracing and metric collection libraries like metered allow you to transparently instru- ment a function by adding an attribute to it, and then every call to that function will run some additional code dictated by the library. 

**Type transformers** 

Sometimes you want to go beyond merely deriving traits for a type and actually change the type’s definition in some fundamental way. In these cases, attribute macros are the way to go. The pin_project crate is a great example of this: its primary purpose is not to implement a particular trait but rather to ensure that all pinned access to fields of a given type happens according to the strict rules that are set forth by Rust’s Pin type and the Unpin trait (we’ll talk more about those types in Chapter 8). 

It does this by generating additional helper types, adding methods to the annotated type, and introducing static safety checks to ensure that users don’t accidentally shoot themselves in the foot. While pin_project could have been implemented with a procedural derive macro, that derived trait implementation would likely not have been obvious, which violates one of our rules for when to use procedural macros. 

**How Do They Work?** 

At the heart of all procedural macros is the TokenStream type, which can be iterated over to get the individual TokenTree items that make up that token stream. A TokenTree is either a single token—like an identifier, punctuation, or a literal—or another TokenStream enclosed in a delimiter like () or {}. By walking a TokenStream, you can parse out whatever syntax you wish as long as the individual tokens are valid Rust tokens. If you want to parse your input specifically as Rust code, you will likely want to use the syn crate, which implements a complete Rust parser and can turn a TokenStream into an easy- to-traverse Rust AST. 

With most procedural macros, you want to not only parse a TokenStream but also produce Rust code to be injected into the program that invokes the procedural macro. There are two main ways to do so. The first is to manually construct a TokenStream and extend it one TokenTree at a time. The second is to use TokenStream’s implementation of FromStr, which lets you parse a string that 

Macros **113** 

**N O T E** 

contains Rust code into a TokenStream with "".parse::<TokenStream>(). You can also mix and match these; if you want to prepend some code to your macro’s input, just construct a TokenStream for the prologue, and then use the Extend trait to append the original input. 

*TokenStream* *also implements* *Display**, which pretty-prints the tokens in the stream. This comes in super handy for debugging!* 

Tokens are very slightly more magical than I’ve described so far in that every token, and indeed every TokenTree, also has a *span*. Spans are how the compiler ties generated code back to the source code that generated it. Every token’s span marks where that token originated. For example, con- sider a (declarative) macro like the one in Listing 7-7, which generates a trivial Debug implementation for the provided type. 

```
macro_rules! name_as_debug {
  ($t:ty) => {
    impl ::core::fmt::Debug for $t {
      fn fmt(&self, f: &mut ::core::fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> ::core::fmt::Result
      { ::core::write!(f, ::core::stringify!($t)) }
```

} }; } 

Listing 7-7: A very simple macro for implementing *Debug* 

Now let’s imagine that someone invokes this macro with name_as_debug! (u31). Technically, the compiler error occurs inside the macro, specifically where we write for $t (the other use of $t can handle an invalid type). But we’d like the compiler to point the user at the u31 in their code—and indeed, that’s what spans let us do. 

The span of the $t in the generated code is the code mapped to $t in the macro invocation. That information is then carried through the com- piler and associated with the eventual compiler error. When that compiler error is eventually printed, the compiler will print the error from inside the macro saying that the type u31 does not exist but will highlight the u31 argu- ment in the macro invocation, since that’s the error’s associated span! 

Spans are quite flexible, and they enable you to write procedural macros that can produce sophisticated error messages if you use the compile_error! macro. As its name implies, compile_error! causes the com- piler to emit an error wherever it is placed with the provided string as the message. This may not seem very useful, until you pair it with a span. By setting the span of the TokenTree you generate for the compile_error! invoca- tion to be equal to the span of some subset of the input, you are effectively telling the compiler to emit this compiler error and point the user to this part of the source. Together, these two mechanisms let a macro produce errors that seem to stem from the relevant part of the code, even though the actual compiler error is somewhere in the generated code that the user never even sees! 

**114** Chapter 7 

**N O T E** 

*If you’ve ever been curious how* *syn**’s error handling works, its* *Error* *type imple- ments an* *Error::to_compile_error* *method, which turns it into a* *TokenStream* *that holds only a* *compile_error!* *directive. What’s particularly neat with* *syn**’s* *Error* *type is that it internally holds a collection of errors, each of which produces a distinct* *compile_error!* *directive with its own span so that you can easily produce multiple independent errors from your procedural macro.* 

The power of spans doesn’t end there; spans are also how Rust’s macro hygiene is implemented. When you construct an Ident token, you also give the span for that identifier, and that span dictates the scope of that identi- fier. If you set the identifier’s span to be Span::call_site(), the identifier
 is resolved where the macro was called from and will thus not be isolated from the surrounding scope. If, on the other hand, you set it to Span::mixed _site() then (variable) identifiers are resolved at the macro definition site, and so will be completely hygienic with respect to similarly named variables at the call site. Span::mixed_site is so called because it matches the rules around identifier hygiene for macro_rules!, which, as we discussed earlier, “mixes” identifier resolution between using the macro definition site for variables and using the call site for types, modules, and everything else. 

**Summary** 

In this chapter we covered both declarative and procedural macros, and looked at when you might find each of them useful in your own code. We also took a deeper dive into the mechanisms that underpin each type of macro and some of the features and gotchas to be aware of when you write your own macros. In the next chapter, we’ll start our journey into asyn- chronous programming and the Future trait. I promise—it’s just on 

the next page. 

Macros **115** 